"SPARTA WWW Site"_sws - "SPARTA Documentation"_sd - "SPARTA Commands"_sc :c

:link(sws,http://sparta.sandia.gov)
:link(sd,Manual.html)
:link(sc,Section_commands.html#comm)

:line

write_grid command :h3

[Syntax:]

write_grid mode file :pre

mode = {parent} or {geom}
file = name of file to write grid info to :ul

[Examples:]

write_grid parent data.grid
write_grid geom viz.out :pre

[Description:]

Write a grid file in text format describing the currently defined
hierarchical grid.  See the "read_grid"_read_grid.html and
"create_grid"_create_grid.html commands for a definition of
hierarchical grids and parent/child cells as used by SPARTA.

The file is written in text format in one of two modes.

If {mode} is {parent} then a list of parent cells is written in the
same format as the input file used by the "read_grid"_read_grid.html"
command.  Thus the file can be used to start a subsequent simulation
using the same grid topology.

If {mode} is {geom} then the geometric description of all the child
cells is written in the following format.  This file can be used in
conjunction with snapshot files of per-grid properties, written by the
"dump grid"_dump.html command, to visualize various properties on the
grid.

Description line :pre

N points
M cells :pre

Points :pre

1 x y z
2 x y z
...
N x y z :pre

Cells :pre

1 p1 p2 p3 p4 ...
2 p1 p2 p3 p4 ...
...
M p1 p2 p3 p4 ... :pre

The file will have N points and M grid cells.  For each point the
x,y,z coordinates are output.  For each grid cell, the indices of the
4 (in 2d) or 8 (in 3d) points comprising the corners of the grid cell
are output.  Each point index is an integer from 1 to N.  The ordering
of the point indices is (LL,LR,UR,UL) or counter-clockwise for 2d grid
cells.  For 3d grid cells it is the same where the first 4 indices are
the lower-Z indices, and the next 4 are the upper-Z indices.

IMPORTANT NOTE: The points in the output file will not be unique.
Instead there will be 4 or 8 for each grid cell, with some (x,y,z)
coordinates being duplicated since they are shared by multiple grid
cells.  Converting the output file to one with a unique list of points
is currently a post-processing task.

[Restrictions:] none

[Related commands:]

"read_grid"_read_grid.html, "create_grid"_create_grid.html

[Default:] none
